

**Manipulation of the Gut Microbiota Reveals Role of Gut Microbiota in Colon
Tumorigenesis**

Joseph P. Zackular<sup>1</sup>, Nielson T. Baxter<sup>1</sup>, Grace Y.
Chen<sup>2*</sup>, and Patrick D. Schloss<sup>1*</sup>

\* To whom correspondence should be addressed.

pschloss@umich.edu; gchenry@umich.edu

1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI

2 Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI




**Abstract**

There is growing evidence that individuals with colonic adenomas and carcinomas
harbor a distinct microbiota. Alterations in the gut microbiota may allow the
outgrowth of bacterial populations that induce genomic mutations or exacerbate
tumor-promoting inflammation. In addition, it is likely that the loss of key
bacterial populations may result in the loss of protective functions that are
normally provided by a healthy microbiota. Using an inflammation-based murine
model of colorectal cancer, we explored the role of the gut microbiota in colon
tumorigenesis. We observed that perturbing the microbiota with different
combinations of antibiotics did not change the bacterial load and resulted in a
reduced number at the end of the model. Using the random forest machine learning
algorithm we were able to create a regression model that predicted the number of
tumors that developed over the course of 73 days based on the composition of the
microbiota on the first day. Finally, the timing of antibiotic treatment was an
important determinant of tumor outcome as colon tumorigenesis was arrested with
the use of antibiotics during the inflammation period of the murine model. These
results suggest that it is possible to predict colon tumorigenesis based on
knowledge of the microbiota and that altering the structure of the gut
microbiota can alter the course of colorectal cancer.

**Keywords:** azoxymethane, dextran sodium sulfate, 16S rRNA gene sequencing,
microbial ecology, microbiome






**Introduction**

The mammalian gastrointestinal tract is home to a complex and dynamic community
of microorganisms, termed the gut microbiota, which is essential for maintaining
host health {BÃ¤ckhed, 2005 #834}. There are complex interactions among bacterial
populations in the gut that have an important effect on host health {Levy, 2013
#3476;Marino, 2014 #3290;Lepp, 2004 #844}. The number of diseases that are
associated with abnormalities in the gut microbiota highlights the importance of
these ecological interactions {Turnbaugh, 2006 #1519;Tamboli, 2004
#3477;Saulnier, 2011 #3478}. Over the last several years, it has been well
documented that perturbations to this community are associated with colorectal
cancer (CRC) in humans and mice {Chen, 2013 #2734;Chen, 2012 #2684;Kostic, 2011
#2435;Geng, 2013 #2686;Shen, 2010 #2687;Sobhani, 2011 #2444;Wang, 2012
#3286;Ahn, 2013 #3263}. We have previously shown that CRC-associated changes in
the gut microbiota directly potentiate colon tumorigenesis in a mouse model of
CRC {Zackular, 2013 #3305}. In that study we observed clear shifts in the
microbiota that were associated with a stepwise progression in the number of
tumors that developed in the colon. In addition, we showed that transfer of the
tumor-associated microbiota to germ-free mice resulted in increased tumor
formation relative to germ-free mice that received the microbiota of healthy
mice. These results were supported by a subsequent study where we colonized
germ-free mice with the microbiota of human donors and observed that different
starting communities yielded significant variation in the number of tumors that
formed {Baxter, 2014 #3469}. Combined, these results demonstrate that the
microbiota interact with the host to affect tumor susceptibility.  A critical
question that remains unanswered is what factors and ecological principles
mediate the gut microbiota's influence on tumor development. Deciphering how
changes in microbial community composition and structure alters gut homeostasis,
and subsequently modulate tumorigenesis, is an essential step in understanding
the etiology of CRC.

Several bacterial populations including *E. coli*, *Bacteroides fragilis*, and
*Fusobacterium nucleatum* have been shown to directly influence tumor development
in the colon. The mechanisms by which bacteria potentiate these processes range
from the production of carcinogenic toxins {Arthur, 2012 #2681;Sears, 2008
#3265} to direct manipulation of the inflammatory status of the tumor
microenvironment {Kostic, 2013 #3285;Rubinstein, 2013 #3264}. Although
individual bacterial populations undoubtedly modulate colorectal
carcinogenesis, there are likely a myriad of commensal bacteria that work
together to influence tumorigenesis in the colon. This is supported by several
studies that have explored the gut microbiota associated with individuals with
CRC {Chen, 2013 #2734;Chen, 2012 #2684;Kostic, 2011 #2435;Geng, 2013
#2686;Shen, 2010 #2687;Sobhani, 2011 #2444;Wang, 2012 #3286;Ahn, 2013
#3263;Zackular, 2014 #3457}. With each study, the number of CRC-associated
bacterial populations that likely play a role in tumorigenesis continues to
grow. This is likely due to the fact that there is significant functional
redundancy within the gut microbiota and various bacterial populations may fill
similar roles in tumorigenesis {Lepage, 2013 #3479;Turnbaugh, 2009 #2387;Qin,
2010 #2337}. Furthermore, some bacterial populations have been hypothesized to
be protective against CRC {Louis, 2009 #3480;Appleyard, 2011 #3494}. This
protective phenotype may be mediated through metabolite production, induction
of immunotolerance, or an ability to outcompete pathogenic bacteria {Zhu, 2011
#3497}. We hypothesize that multiple bacteria in the gut microbiota have the
potential to play pro-tumorigenic or tumor-suppressive roles; thus, the gut
microbiota's influence on CRC is likely to be driven by complex interactions
within the microbiota and the colonic epithelium.

We have shown that conventionally-raised mice treated with a cocktail of
metronidazole, streptomycin, and vancomycin in their drinking water had a
significant decrease in tumor numbers using an inflammation-based model of CRC
{Zackular, 2014 #3457}. In the current study, we explored how differential
alterations in the microbiota by different antibiotic treatments affected the
composition of the microbiota and how changes in bacterial community structure
affected tumor susceptibility. Our results confirmed our hypothesis that the
microbiota is capable of driving tumorigenesis and that an antibiotic-based
intervention during tumor induction can arrest tumorigenesis. Our analysis
further supports the model that individual bacterial populations play an
important role in CRC, but the ecological interactions and community structure
of the gut microbiota mediate the capacity to modulate tumorigenesis.



**Results**



***Antibiotic perturbation of the gut microbiota modulates tumorigenicity.***
We subjected specific pathogen-free (SPF) C57BL/6 mice to an inflammation-based
model of colorectal cancer that utilizes azoxymethane (AOM) as a mutagen and
dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) to induce inflammation {Zackular, 2013
#3305;Baxter, 2014 #3469;De Robertis, 2011 #3300} (Figure 1A). To determine how
differential changes in
the gut microbiota affected tumorigenesis, we manipulated the microbiota by
administering seven different antibiotic combinations and then quantified the
effects of the treatments on the number of tumors observed at the end of the
model. Specifically, we treated mice with (i) no antibiotics, (ii)
metronidazole, streptomycin, and vancomycin (all antibiotics), (iii)
streptomycin and vancomycin ($\Delta$ metronidazole), (iv) metronidazole and
vancomycin ($\Delta$ streptomycin), (v) metronidazole and streptomycin ($\Delta$
vancomycin), (vi) metronidazole, (vii) streptomycin, and (viii) vancomycin.
Quantitative PCR targeting the 16S rRNA gene indicated that the number of copies
of the 16S rRNA gene did not differ between treatment groups, indicating that
the different antibiotic combinations did not affect total bacterial load. The
three antibiotics were selected based on their reported ability to target
general groups of bacteria including anaerobes (metronidazole), Gram-negatives
(streptomycin), and Gram-positives (vancomycin). Sequencing the 16S rRNA genes
that were present in the feces of conventional and antibiotic-treated mice
demonstrated that the different antibiotic treatments generated different
bacterial communities prior to AOM injection (Figure 1B); however, the
composition of these communities could not have been predicted by the spectrum
of the antibiotic that was used to treat the mice (Figure 1C,D). These results
demonstrated that perturbation of the microbiota through the use of antibiotics
yields a differential capacity for colon tumorigenesis.




***Tumor burden can be predicted from the initial microbiota.***
Tumor burden can be predicted from the initial microbiota. Serial collection of
fecal samples allowed us to ascertain the composition of the microbiota for each
mouse and associate it with the number of tumors that developed at the end of
the model. Using the 16S rRNA gene sequence data generated from feces collected
on the day of AOM injection, we assigned the sequences to operational taxonomic
units (OTUs) that were defined as a group of sequences that, on average, were
not more than 3% different from each other. We then used the regression-based
random forest machine learning algorithm to identify OTUs that would enable us
to predict the number of tumors that developed at the end of the model. The
model that included OTUs that had an average relative abundance greater than
1.5% resulted in the greatest percentage of the variance explained
(Supplementary Figure 1).This model included 15
OTUs and explained 62.6% of the
variation in the tumor counts (Figure 2). The OTUs were ranked by their
importance in the random forest model as measured by the percent the mean
squared error increases when the OTU was removed. When the OTUs were sorted in
decreasing order by the percent they contributed to increasing the mean squared
error (MSE) of the model, there was a jump between the sixth and seventh OTUs
(Figure 2A). In fact, when we reconstructed the model using only the six OTUs
that provided the greatest change in the MSE, the model explained 67%
of the variation in the observed tumor counts was indicating that the model
based on the reduced dataset explained as much of the variation in tumor counts
as the model based on all of the OTUs. These six OTUs included members of the
Firmicutes (OTU 6), Bacteroidetes (OTUs 4 and 19), Proteobacteria (OTU 3), and
Tenericutes (OTUs 34 and 35). Increased numbers of tumors were associated with
decreases in the relative abundance of relatives of the Enterobacteriaceae (OTU
3), *Ureaplasma* (OTU 34), and *Lactobacillus* (OTU 6) and increases in the
relative abundance of the *Anaeroplasma* (OTU 35), Porphyromonadaceae (OTU 4),
and *Prevotella* (OTU 19) (Figure 3). Our random forest modeling demonstrated
that it was possible to predict the number of tumors at the end of the model
based on the composition of the microbiota at the beginning of the model.




***Tumor burden can be predicted from the microbiota at the end of the model.***
Similar to our analysis using the initial composition of the microbiota, we
developed a random forest regression model to predict the number of tumors in
the mice based on the composition of the microbiota at the end of the model. The
model included 11 OTUs after we again applied a filter
requiring each OTU to have an average relative abundance of at least 1.5%. The
model explained 52.9% of the variation in
the tumor counts (Supplementary Figure 2), which is less than we observed when
we modeled tumor counts based on the initial community composition. The seven
most important OTUs in the model explained 55.4%
of the variation and included *Odoribacter* (OTU 70), *Bacteroides* (OTU 5),
*Lactobacillus* (OTU 6), Enterobacteriaceae (OTU 3), *Alloprevotella* (OTU 14),
*Prevotella* (OTU 19), and Betaproteobacteria (OTU 17) (Supplementary Figure 3).
Interestingly, of the OTUs that were predictive of the number of tumor counts
using the baseline and final community composition data, only three of the OTUs
overlapped. These included *Lactobacillus* (OTU 6), Enterobacteriaceae (OTU 3),
and *Prevotella* (OTU 19).




***The microbial community is dynamic during inflammation-associated tumorigenesis.***
Using mice that were colonized with human feces, we previously reported that
tumor burden was associated with the amount of change in the community structure
over the course of the AOM-DSS model {Baxter, 2014 #3469}. In the current study,
however, there was a non-significant association between the change in the
community structure as measured by the $\theta$<sub>YC</sub> metric of community
structure similarity and tumor burden ($\rho$=0.26,
P=0.08; Figure 4A). We did observe that mice
that did not receive antibiotics and those that received the Îvancomycin and
Îmetronidazole treatments changed the most over the course of the model.
Interestingly, when we investigated the temporal progression of the three OTUs
that were most important for predicting the number of tumors based on the
starting and final community structure (i.e. OTUs 3, 6, and 19; Figure 2B) we
observed dynamic changes in relative abundance with time during the course of
the model.  These data suggest that the magnitude of change that occurs in a
microbial community during tumorigenesis does not influence tumor burden.
Instead, specific changes in community structure and the abundance of
tumor-associated bacterial populations dictate tumor burden.


***Antibiotic intervention during inflammation reduces tumorigenesis.***
The AOM-DSS model reproduces certain characteristics observed with human CRC,
but microbial contributions to tumorigenesis have not been elucidated
{De Robertis, 2011 #3300}. To
determine whether the gut microbiota modulates tumorigenesis by affecting
AOM-induced mutagenesis or DSS-induced inflammation, we performed two antibiotic
intervention experiments. We first treated mice with the vancomycin,
metronidazole and streptomycin two weeks prior to the administration of AOM and
up until the first round of DSS (Figure 1A). We found that these mice had a
similar tumor burden to untreated mice (Figure 5).  Next, we treated mice
between the first and second round of DSS administration, when inflammatory
responses were the greatest and aberrant changes in microbial community
structure occurs {Zackular, 2013 #3305} (Figure 1A). With this treatment, there
was a significant decrease in the number of tumors (Figure 5). These results
suggest that the gut microbiota-mediated effect on CRC is independent of
AOM-mediated carcinogenesis. Furthermore, it shows that targeting the gut
microbiota at later stages of tumor growth is a viable option for minimizing
tumorigenesis and highlights microbiota manipulation as a potential therapeutic
in CRC.


**Discussion**

In the present study, we established the importance of the microbial community
structure in determining the extent of tumorigenesis.  We demonstrated that
manipulation of the murine gut microbiota with different antibiotic regimens
resulted in non-overlapping community structures that were associated with
disparate levels of tumorigenesis. Enrichment in the relative abundance of
several bacterial populations was associated with high and low levels of colon
tumors. We determined that the outgrowth of potentially inflammatory members of
the gut microbiota was associated with increased tumorigenesis only when there
was a corresponding decrease in potentially protective, butyrate producing
bacteria. By perturbing the bacterial community at two different time points
during the AOM/DSS model, we determined that the gut microbiota affects
tumorigenesis via a mechanism that does not involve AOM-induced carcinogenesis.
Our experiments also demonstrated that targeting the gut microbiota at the
emergence of dysbiosis (i.e. after the first round of DSS in the AOM/DSS model)
is a viable strategy for the amelioration of colon tumorigenesis.

In recent years, there has been a focus on identifying bacterial populations
that are etiologic agents of CRC. Several commensal bacteria, including *E. coli*,
*Fusobacterium nucleatum* and enterotoxigenic *Bacteroides fragilis* (ETBF) have
been linked to CRC in humans {Arthur, 2012 #2681;Rubinstein, 2013 #3264;Sears,
2008 #3265}. F. nucleatum, which has been detected on the surface of over 50%
adenomas in one study, can promote inflammation within the tumor
microenvironment in multiple intestinal neoplasia mice {Kostic, 2013
#3285;Kostic, 2011 #2435}. ETBF increases tumor multiplicity in the colon of
multiple intestinal neoplasia mice through the action of a secreted
metalloprotease toxin. It has been estimated that between 5-35% of people carry
ETBF {Housseau, 2010 #3498}. Although there is substantial evidence for a role
in potentiating tumorigenesis, the fact that each of these bacteria is only
associated with a fraction of CRCs suggests that it is unlikely that there is a
single microbial agent that causes cancer. Rather, the role of the gut
microbiota in CRC is likely polymicrobial in nature. The results in the present
study support this hypothesis, as we demonstrated that non-overlapping community
structures confer similar levels of tumorigenesis in mice. When we examined the
relative abundance of bacterial populations associated with increased tumor
burden, we never observed consistent enrichment of any one population in the
three treatment groups that had the highest tumor levels (i.e., vancomycin only,
streptomycin only, and âmetronidazole). Similarly, potentially protective
bacterial populations were not consistently depleted across treatment groups
that developed the fewest tumors (All antibiotics, âvancomycin, âstreptomycin,
and metronidazole only). This suggests that there may be redundancy in
tumor-modulating roles amongst different bacteria populations within the gut
microbiota.

During tumor induction, we observed a marked increase in members of the
Enterobacteriaceae associated with two antibiotic treatment groups
(âmetronidazole and âvancomycin). Interestingly, one treatment group
(âvancomycin) developed fewer tumors despite a similar increase in this
potentially tumor-modulating bacterial clade. A recent study by Arthur and
colleagues {Arthur, 2012 #3490} showed that in an IL-10-deficient
colitis-associated mouse model of CRC, there was an enrichment of
Enterobacteriaceae associated with inflammation. This led to an expansion of E.
coli populations with genotoxic capabilities and a consequential increase in
tumor multiplicity and invasion. Furthermore, members of the Enterobacteriaceae
have been shown to perpetuate inflammation in several inflammatory diseases,
including ulcerative colitis, which increase an individualâs risk of developing
CRC {Rolhion, 2007 #3499;Garrett, 2007 #3501;Rooks, 2014 #3502}. When we further
examined the two antibiotic treatment groups, we observed that mice with an
increased tumor burden had a corresponding decrease in several potentially
anti-inflammatory and butyrate producing bacterial populations. These
observations support a model by which the pathogenicity potential of individual
members of the gut microbiota is ultimately determined by the overall community
structure and ecological interactions within the gut microbiota. We hypothesize
that inflammatory and carcinogenic commensal bacteria, such as
Enterobacteriaceae, can only mediate a pathogenic phenotype if the context of
the community structure is conducive.

One possible mechanism by which community structure mediates tumorigenicity is
by shifting the balance of immunomodulatory metabolites and signals. During
health, the gut microbiota is an important mediator of immunotolerance, but when
the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory signals is disrupted, gut pathologies
can arise {Kelly, 2005 #3506}. In our mice, Enterobacteriaceae is likely acting
as an inflammatory member of the gut microbiota. However, we only observed an
increase in tumorigenesis when there was a corresponding depletion of
potentially protective members of the genera Clostridium, Enterococcus, and
Streptococcus that have reported protective roles against inflammation and
tumorigenesis.  For example, members of Clostridium are known producers
of short chain fatty acids (SCFA) in the colon {Louis, 2009 #3480}. SCFA,
specifically butyrate, are important nutrients for colonocytes and possess
anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor properties {Hague, 1995 #2678;Donohoe, 2011 #2596;Louis, 2009 #3480}. Furthermore, *Enterococcus*
and *Streptococcus* species have been linked to down-regulating inflammatory
responses in the colon {Wang, 2008 #3503;Kaci, 2011 #3504}. It is likely that
these bacterial populations have the ability to antagonize inflammatory clades
(e.g. Enterobacteriaceae) and confer protection; however, when perturbation to
the microbial community structure disrupts this homeostasis, opportunistic
pathogens can potentiate tumorigenesis.

In our previous work, we demonstrated that dysbiosis of the gut microbiota
generates a pro-inflammatory environment which results in a self-reinforcing
pathogenic cascade between the gut microbiota and the host {Zackular, 2013
#3305;Baxter, 2014 #3469}. In this study, we demonstrated that antibiotic
manipulation of the gut microbiota during the onset of inflammation can
significantly decrease tumorigenesis in mice. This highlights the efficacy of
targeting the gut microbiota in CRC. Additional studies are needed to explore
the viability of manipulating the gut microbiota in CRC with methods such as
diet, probiotics, and prebiotics.



**Materials & Methods**

**Animals and animal care.** Studies were conducted using adult (8 to 12 week
old) age-matched C57BL/6 male mice that were maintained under SPF conditions.
Mice were co-housed in groups of five and fed the same autoclaved chow diet. All
animal experiments were approved by the University Committee on Use and Care of
Animals at the University of Michigan.

**Inflammation-induced colon tumorigenesis.** Mice received a single
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of azoxymethane (10 mg/kg). Water containing
2% DSS was administered to mice beginning on day 5 for 5 days followed by 16
days of water. This was repeated twice for a total of 3 rounds of DSS
{Zackular, 2013 #3305}. Mice were euthanized 3 weeks after the third round of
DSS administration for tumor counting. At necropsy, all colons were harvested,
flushed of luminal contents, and cut open longitudinally to count and measure
tumors.

**Antibiotic treatment.** Mice were treated with all possible combinations of
metronidazole (0.75 g/L), streptomycin (2 g/L), and vancomycin (0.5 g/L) to
create eight treatment groups: no antibiotics (N=12), all antibiotics (n=9)
(metronidazole, streptomycin, and vancomycin), $\Delta$ metronidazole (n=5)
(streptomycin and vancomycin), $\Delta$ streptomycin (n=5) (metronidazole and
vancomycin), $\Delta$ vancomycin (n=5) (metronidazole and streptomycin), metronidazole
only (N=5), streptomycin only (N=5), and vancomycin only (N=3). Antibiotics were
administered in mouse drinking water for 2 weeks prior to and throughout the
duration of AOM/DSS administration, unless otherwise specified in Figure 1A.
Tumors were enumerated at the end of the model.

**16S rRNA quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis.** Relative bacterial loads were
quantified by qPCR analysis of bacterial genomic DNA using KAPA SYBR-fast
Master Mix (KAPA biosciences) and universal 16S rRNA gene primers (F:
ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGT; R: ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGC) {Vaishnava, 2011 #3505}.
Samples were normalized to fecal mass and relative fold change was determined
using untreated stool samples for each replicate mouse. Note that qPCR
measures relative fold change of 16S rRNA gene copy number, not actual bacterial
numbers.



**DNA extraction and 16S rRNA gene sequencing.** Fecal samples were collected
daily from the mice throughout the AOM/DSS protocol and immediately frozen for
storage at -20Â°C. For each mouse, 8 fecal samples distributed over the 73-day
timeline of the AOM/DSS model were selected for analysis (Figure 1A). Microbial
genomic DNA was extracted using the PowerSoil-htp 96 Well Soil DNA Isolation Kit
(MO BIO laboratories) using an EpMotion 5075. The V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene
from each sample was amplified, sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq Personal
Sequencing platform, and curated as described previously using the mothur
software package {Kozich, 2013 #2719; Schloss, 2009 #1816}. Briefly, we reduced
sequencing and PCR errors by requiring reads to fully overlap and in cases where
base calls conflicted, we broke the conflict by requiring one base call to have
a PHRED quality score 6 units higher than the other otherwise the base call was
replaced with an ambiguous base call in the contig. Any reads containing
ambiguous base calls were culled. Sequences were aligned to a customized version
of the SILVA 16S rRNA sequence database {Pruesse, 2007 #1735} and were screened
to insure that they correctly overlapped within the V4 region. Chimeric
sequences were identified using the de novo implementation of UCHIME and they
were culled {Edgar, 2011 #2406}. The resulting sequences had a median length of
253 nt and we rarefied to 2,500 sequences per sample to limit effects of uneven
sampling. A mock community was sequenced and processed in parallel to the fecal
samples. Based on the mock community data we observed a sequencing error rate of
0.05%. The complete analysis methods and this document as an R-executable
document are available at
https://github.com/SchlossLab/Zackular_AbAOMDSS_SciReports_2015. All FASTQ
sequence data can be obtained from the Sequence Read Archive at NCBI (Need to
deposit data).

**Statistical analysis.** The microbiota data were analyzed using the R project
for statistical computing. All R source code is available on our GitHub
repository at https://github.com/SchlossLab/Zackular_AbAOMDSS_SciReports_2015.
All random forest models were made using the randomForest package with 10,000
trees {Breiman, 2001 #2526}. Diagnostic plots indicated that the percent of the
variance explained had stabilized with this number of trees. Comparison of
tumor counts were made by carrying out non-parametric pairwise Wilcoxon tests.
The resulting p-values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure using an experiment-wide Type I error rate of 0.05.


**Acknowledgements**

This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes for Health to PDS
(R01GM099514, R01HG005975, P30DK034933, University of Michigan GI SPORE) and GYC
(University of Michigan GI SPORE, ARRA Supplement P30CA4659-22S3, and R01
CA166879).



**References**



\newpage


**Figure legends**

**Figure 1. Antibiotic perturbation drives changes in microbial community
structure and final tumor burden.** The AOM-DSS model was administered to C57BL/6
mice reared under standard pathogen free (SPF) conditions with different
antibiotic perturbations; Black arrows indicate fecal samples that used for our
analysis (A). The mice were treated with all possible combinations of
metronidazole, streptomycin, and vancomycin to create eight treatment groups,
which resulted in considerable differences in the taxonomic composition of the
gut communities at the start of the model (Day 0) (B). These communities
resulted in a continuum of tumor burden in the mice (C and D). The stars
indicate which treatments yielded a significantly (P<0.05) different number of
tumors when compared to the treatment with the vertical line.

<img src="results/figures/figure1-1.png" title="plot of chunk figure1" alt="plot of chunk figure1" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


**Figure 2. A random forest model successfully predicted the number of tumors in
the mice at the end of the model (A) based on their microbiota composition at the
start of the model (B).** The OTUs in B are ranked in decreasing order of their
mean decrease in the mean squared error. The relationships between the first 6
OTUs and the number of tumors found in those mice are shown in Figure 3.

<img src="results/figures/figure2-1.png" title="plot of chunk figure2" alt="plot of chunk figure2" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


**Figure 3. Relationship between the initial relative abundance of the most
informative OTUs from the random forest model with the number of tumors found
in the mice at the end of the model.** The vertical gray line indicates the
limit of detection. Panels are ordered in decreasing order of the percent
increase in the mean squared error of the model when that OTU was removed.

<img src="results/figures/figure3-1.png" title="plot of chunk figure3" alt="plot of chunk figure3" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />



**Figure 4. The murine microbiota is dynamic but the amount of change is
not associated with the final number of tumors.** The structure of the gut
microbiota associated with untreated and the $\Delta$ metronidazole and $\Delta$
vancoymcin-treated mice changed the most throughout the model as measured using
the $\Theta$<sub>YC</sub> distance metric (A). OTUs 3, 6, and 19 were among the
most salient features for predicting tumor burden at the beginning and end of
the model (B). The plotting symbols and characters are the same as those used in
Figure 1. In panel B, the median relative abundance is indicated by the plotting
symbol and the range of observed relative abundances is plotted by the vertical
bar. The vertical blue regions indicate when the DSS treatments were applied.

<img src="results/figures/figure4-1.png" title="plot of chunk figure4" alt="plot of chunk figure4" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


**Figure 5. Antibiotic intervention prior to second administration of
DSS alleviates tumor burden.** Interventions with an antibiotic cocktail
of metronidazole, vancomycin, and streptomycin were performed as
depicted in Figure 1A with enumeration of tumors performed at the end point of
the model (A). Representative images of tumors in the distal colon of mice from
each treatment group (B).

<img src="results/figures/figure5-1.png" title="plot of chunk figure5" alt="plot of chunk figure5" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


**Supplementary Figure 1. Quality of random forest regression fit as a function
of the minimum average relative abundance an OTU must have to be included in the
model.** The integers displayed across the plot indicate the number of OTUs that
were included in the model. Because a minimum average relative abundance of 1.5%
yielded the best R<sup>2</sup>, it was used for the remainder of the analysis.

<img src="results/figures/supp_figure1-1.png" title="plot of chunk supp_figure1" alt="plot of chunk supp_figure1" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


**Supplemental Figure 2. A random forest model successfully predicted the number
of tumors in the mice at the end of the model (A) based on their microbiota
composition at the start end of the model (B).** The OTUs in B are ranked in
decreasing order of their mean decrease in the MSE. The relationships between
the first 6 OTUs and the number of tumors found in those mice are shown in
Supplemental Figure 3.

<img src="results/figures/supp_figure2-1.png" title="plot of chunk supp_figure2" alt="plot of chunk supp_figure2" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />


**Supplemental Figure 3. Relationship between the initial relative abundance of the most
informative OTUs from the random forest model with the number of tumors found
in the mice at the end of the model.** The vertical gray line indicates the
limit of detection.

<img src="results/figures/supp_figure3-1.png" title="plot of chunk supp_figure3" alt="plot of chunk supp_figure3" style="display: block; margin: auto;" />
